.TH EDIT 1 "2026-06-18" "edit 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
edit \- MS-DOS EDIT.COM reimplementation for Linux
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B edit
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] [\fIFILE\fR...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B edit
is a full\-screen text editor for Linux terminals, faithfully reimplementing
the MS-DOS EDIT.COM interface with DOS-style blue-background UI, pull-down
menus, and F-key bindings.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-e ", " \-\-encoding " " \fIENC\fR
Force file encoding. Valid values: utf-8, cp437, cp850, iso-8859-1, windows-1252.
.TP
.BR \-r ", " \-\-readonly
Open all files in read-only mode.
.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-\-line-numbers
Show line numbers in the gutter.
.TP
.BR \-\-theme " " \fINAME\fR
Color theme: classic (default), high-contrast, plain.
.TP
.BR \-\-no-autosave
Disable auto-save and crash recovery.
.TP
.BR \-\-no-highlight
Disable syntax highlighting.
.TP
.BR \-\-no-session
Skip the session restore prompt on startup. The editor opens a blank buffer even when
a previous session file exists.
.TP
.BR \-\-no-plugins
Disable all plugin loading for this session. Installed plugins are not scanned, loaded, or
prompted for. Does not modify saved per-plugin consent in
.IR $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/edit/plugins.toml .
.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-\-debug
Enable verbose diagnostic logging.
.TP
.BR \-\-locale " " \fILOCALE\fR
Override locale (e.g. C.UTF-8).
.SH KEYBINDINGS
.TP
.B Ctrl+S, F5
Save current file.
.TP
.B Ctrl+Q
Quit editor.
.TP
.B F3
Find next match.
.TP
.B F10
Open menu bar.
.TP
.B Alt+F
Open File menu.
.TP
.B Ctrl+F
Open Find dialog.
.TP
.B F12
Open Save As Encoding dialog.
Select the output encoding (UTF-8, UTF-16 LE/BE, CP437, CP850, ISO-8859-1, Windows-1252)
and press Enter to write the file in the chosen encoding.
Press Escape to cancel without saving.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B EDIT_LOCALE
Override locale detection (same as \-\-locale).
.TP
.B EDIT_AUTOSAVE_INTERVAL
Override autosave interval in seconds (1-300).
.TP
.B EDIT_DEBUG_RENDER
Set to 1 to enable render debug logging.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/edit/config.toml
Per-user configuration file.
.TP
.I $XDG_STATE_HOME/edit/logs/
Log directory.
.SH MENUS
Press
.B F10
or
.B Alt+F
to open the menu bar.
.PP
.B File menu:
New, Open, Save, Save As, Save As Encoding\&.\&.\&. (F12), Exit.
.PP
.B Edit menu:
Undo, Redo, Cut, Copy, Paste, Select All.
.PP
.B Search menu:
Find, Find Next, Find Previous, Replace.
.SH ENCODING
All file I/O is UTF-8 by default. Use \-\-encoding to force a specific encoding.
Legacy CP437 files are transcoded on read.
Supported encodings: utf-8, utf-16-le, utf-16-be, cp437, cp850, iso-8859-1, windows-1252.
.SH AUTHOR
The edit contributors.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR vi (1),
.BR nano (1)
